USHMM Archives RG-50.030*0047 2
going a little too -- then I start to study in grad school, dentistry. But during the war, first
when the German attacked Polish country, this was in September Ist, 1939. There was a
terrible time. There suddenly became airplanes and they start to bombard people on the
street. There was exactly vacation finishing, and the children, they have first day at school,
and they came in this beautiful weather. The sun was shining and they was walking on the
street. And suddenly came planes. You -- we didn't know. We thought this is our own planes.
Very low. And they suddenly start to with machine guns killing the people on the street.
Throwing bombs, was killed, terrible thing. And then we heard on the news that this is for
the war. The Germans attacked Polish country. So after two or three days, there was -- the
President of the Poland, he gave an order to young people to run away to east, in the
direction of Russia. So we went, four brothers together in the east to the city of Lvov. We
came there. It was terrible way because we were going only really walking, running, and
during the day time the planes, they are going low on the way and was killing people, he
refuge, the refuge -- no, the refugees. Ok, so this what happened and Lvov, when we were
there a few days there came Russian and the German, they went back and they took the part
of Poland and half of part of the city of Przemysl where we were living. So the city was
divided by river San. One side -- east -- was Russian, and west was German. So we can see
each other. And I worked there in polyclinic, but -- and during this time, when was Russian.
My parents, they still were working in our place. And my brother, elder, was in hospital.
And the young-- younger brothers, they were working in the place to get some work because
everyone supposed to working. And then started another war. And this was in June 22, 1941,
the German attacked Russia, and in a few hours later they were in our town and other they
came.

01:06:14
So it was kills. There was -- after this, the Russian came back and they was fighting about
the city of Przemysl one week, seven almost days. So, in the morning, there were Russian.
At night, there were Germans. And every person was hiding deep, you know, in the cellars
and other, other places because we didn't know what to do. After seven days, the Russians
got to go back, pulling back, and the Germans are coming. So we were -- we want-- wanted
in the beginning to go with Russian, but they said they won't take us civil people. Only they
was going by themselves. So we left there, and the Germans came. And after a few weeks --
this was 1941 -- they start to make orders, ghetto Jewish -- segregate Jewish people.
Everybody has to work -- arbeit.' And start to be difficult life, but still we didn't know what.

Q: How many of you were together?

A: In this time, we were four brothers together. My sister was still in Lvov, in Lemberg.”

Q: Could you hold up the photograph of your family, please, so we can see it?
