USHMM Archives RG-50.030*0047 3

A: Yes.

TECHNICAL CONVERSATION

A: But I will explain who is who. So this is my father. This is my mother. This is my older
brother, the physician. And this is my sister, and this is my younger brother, who were killed
in the war -- like in ghetto. They took them to concentration camp. This is the mother-in-law
of my youngest brother's wife. This is her mother and her father. They was together killed in
1942. Those taken to a concentration camp from ghetto. That's my close family. This is from
ghetto, when we were there. We were working. This is for my oldest brother, the physician.
He worked in hospital, and there was like a field hospital in ghetto -- small hospital. He was
working like a physician there, and this is his ID. And this was my ID. I was working with
him there, the same, given in, in the ghetto.

Q: Thank you.

A: So in the beginning, when we were in ghetto, we have to go. We were organized. Young
people -- everybody has to go in the morning under the guard to do work. So I was working
with my older brother. We have to -- they took us to a special place. We were loading coals
in the wagons forward and back, under heavy guard, from morning until late evening. And
nothing to eat. Only you have to work in there. If you have something with you -- a piece of
bread, anything -- you could have.

01:09:29
And we work very hard. Then -- this was like in 1941. Then in 1942, they start to take so-
called Aktion’ -- take people from the ghetto and make smaller ghetto. So they surround, for
example, one part of ghetto. And this part people couldn't live there. They have to go to the
wagon, to the train, and they was taking them out. Nobody knows where they were sent.
There's only -- they're taking us another place. They will have good life working, and this
and this. So the people cannot say no because there was an order. So you have to stay. So
this was in 1942. 1941, they, they asked to get -- to give to them thousand young boys. But
the ghetto, the -- no. In ghetto, the people who are partners like small government in ghetto,
they, they was taking time. They didn't like to give the young people. They wanted to have a
list of young people. So this was going to 1942. And then in the beginning of 1942, they
said, "Two thousand." And they came. They have at least -- they came to our home, and they
wanted to take me. But my younger brother, he was a little physical stronger, he said, "No, I
will go." And they took him to the concentration labor-like camp in Lvov. And this was the
young boy who they later hanged. And they took him there. He, he voluntary -- he was going
because he wanted to save my life. And I was still working with my, with my parents and,
