USHMM Archives RG-50.030*0047 6
The daughter was maybe eight, nine years old. And she pushed her, and she start to scramble
go through the window. And suddenly, the SS man who was far away, they was almost
finished the job. They turned back and saw the girl coming out, and this guy, he was helping
her. They came back. And they start to beat her and kick her with feet in, in the face in front
of entrance. And then the mother start to scream. And they opened the doors, and they said,
"Out! Out! Out!" And there was standing a row with soldiers and with policemen with rifles.

01:18:14
And they throw us — “Ground! Ground!” And was they hitting us with rifles. Who got down,
they killed him on the spot. Who could run has to go another place. And they, they -- L, I,
with my brother and my cousin, we were running. We got the full blows, but we survive. We
came to the place they keep us together. And there came a sergeant, and he said, "Now, we
will shoot you. Stay in a row." And my older brother, who was saying to me, he said, "Aim
your chest to the rifles. Because," he said, "They will hit you in the arm or in your ear. They
will not shoot you twice. And they will put line -- put you in a great big line, and you will
suffocate. So try to aim yourself," he said, "and stay." And we were staying in line, and they
with the rifles, they wanted to shoot us. Suddenly came an officer, an SS officer, and he's
asking, "What's going on here?" They said, "No. We find they're hiding Jewish people.
According to the order, they're supposed to voluntary come here. They didn't come, so we
picked them up. And now we have to shoot them." He look on us. He said, "No. The train
still is under the station. We need fat Jewish people. We need there for some -- " He said like
soap or something, I don't remember so. "Put them to the train." And he put us -- they put us
to the train. There was in my wagon was over a hundred people like sardine together, you
know. And was -- this was winter. But we were thirsty, dry mouth, dry tongue. high
temperature. We was sitting, and we couldn't, we couldn't breathe. And they locked the door.
There was barbed wires on the small window. And the train start to move. And one man, he
hang himself in the train in the belt, and they tried to cut him off, and they cut him off and he
was angry.

01:20:46
He said, “No. I will not go for -- so you will have to... No! Don't! No!" He was screaming.
He hanged himself. And I was going, I said to my brother, "No, I will not go there. I will
commit suicide. I will not go." He said, "Don't do this. Don't." I said, "No, I will never go."
And I was going little by little, they helped me came to the window. And I don't know how I
find in my pocket pliers. I have this small pliers. And I start to break the barbed wires. I was
working a long time, and I cut my hands, was bleeding. And I broke the wires. When I was
in bunker, I had a loaf of round bread. And I saved them. They was taking us, I took the
bread. Here I had little belt. And when I broke the wire, I said, "Push me through the
window. I will jump." And the people start to push me and my head forward. Was tight, but
when I was looking down, I was on the running, you know, the wheels train. And then I saw
the tracks and the small stones, like gravels. Everything. I said, "No. I will not go with my
head, because I will -- right to the wheels." It was like instant. One second, I wanted to
