USHMM Archives RG-50.030*0047 15
closed the windows; and they start to talk this and this and not so. My wife asked them
always, "How far are Germans? Maybe they can come back." They was suspicious.
"What?," they asking. "What?" "Because," she said, "there was one time that he went back,
the Germans came back. So this is what I'm asking." He said, "Don't worry. They are chasing
them. They are running away. They are loosing their pants, pants." And they said, "They are
running away. They will never come back here." And we heard. We were standing behind
the doors, but we heard this. And we came and sat. But look, we couldn't talk, because we
didn't talk, only were whispering for almost two years. We couldn't walk, because there was
not walking up and down, just not exercise. We were pale, you know, and terrible. And they
picked up their rifles. "Who there?" They thought maybe partisans. So she told them. And
one of them was a Jewish lieutenant and his family was from Ukraine killed by Germans.
And he -- and his sergeant, he was a regular Russian. He said, "My, my goal is to chase the
German and give them back what they did to my family, to my family." He was crying. He
was kissing us, hugging. He said to my wife, "You are really hero! You are really hero!
Without weapons, without nothing, you could fight so many as in the little girl, the sister."
They took pictures, and said, "What you need? We will give you what you need." He said,
"We have the German hospital here, there, there. The whole thing there. Loaded with
everything. What you -- dresses, shoes maybe. And we will bring you meat." And we said,
"No, no. Not now. We would like to have freedom." And how we did it, because we were
afraid about neighbors still. So we told them that -- it was night, we will go, the men, with
them back to hospital. And next day, they will bring us, we will come back like guerrillas
who are coming to, you know, with the army. And we will look for my wife. I will ask the
neighbors about her. We will come like guests. We came. We survived; we will hug her, we
will kiss her. So they will not suspect that it was us she was hiding people. They said, "That's
a good idea." And we went, and the women and children were still with my wife there. Next
day, in the morning, we came with them. There was a wagon with horses and everything was
there. We had rifles with us. And I came, and I am looking; and I asked one neighbor. I
know them, because when I saw them, I said, "Hey, do you know if still around a...a girl?
Her name is Podgorska, Stefania Podgorska. She's my friend, my, my neighbor. I have to
seek her." She said, "Why, yeah, yeah, yeah. She is a good girl. She's...she's..." They thought
maybe we would kill her. Because some people came to take advantage, maybe somebody
that paid them or hanged them. Said, "No, no. She is my good friend. She's -- I'd like to see
her." She said, "Well, she lives there." We were going there. We knocked on the door. She
came: "Ahhh! Hi. Hi." And we were greeting each other. And there was beautiful thing what
she did. They -- we start to give to her some food, bring everything. And we lived --

Q: Ok, we've got about two minutes. Is there anything -- this is quite a story. When you, you
had embraced, you were free, where did you go?

01:58:00

A: In town, to find an apartment to live. And next day, I find apartment. Was occupied by
German, some people. German, and they run away. They left everything they had.
Everything was there. So I moved to the apartment. And I took the apartment. And then I
