USHMM Archives RG-50.030*0047 16
had -- twice they came because there was some band of people who were killing people who
saved Jewish life and, and the survivors. They killed them. They said, "One bullet for the
survivor, two bullets for this who saved them -- for them who saved them." And they was
going around, but after a while they caught them. They came twice to my apartment. I was
living with my brother, his fiancée, my wife, her sister; and we lived there. And they came.
That was on the second floor, and there was a balcony outside. There was knocking on the
door. So it was night, was like in winter, in February. And they said -- I said, "Who are
there?" And they said, "Milice! Milice!® Open!" I said, "What are you looking for?" "You
have to go with us to, to work. We have to fix the bridge. Is broken bridge." I said, "No, I'm
not going at night with nobody. You have some business to me, well, come in the morning
when it's lighter." People. I will see who's who. They start to swear to me. "Open the door, or
we will break the door!" Like this, like this. 1 saw who were there. I run on the balcony. I
was screaming for help, help -- and they start to run away. This was number one. And then a
few months later, another time they came. So the commandant of the city -- there was a
Russian commandant. And I went to him, and he told me, "Listen, you will never survive
here."

Q: You left, is that true?

02:00:34

A: Yes, I left. He said, "Go to another part of Poland, where nobody will know you. Nobody.
Change your name from the Pol -- Jewish name or German name to the Polish name." And
we did. "Under new name, go and stay in another place of Poland where nobody knows you.
Maybe you will survive." But the best thing that I will tell, if I don't tell you this in secret. I
ran away from him. This no place for me to live. We want to survive. "Go west in the
country. West, if you can." And this happened. I went to Krakow. I changed my name. And
then I went to Wroclaw. I was studying. I was accepted there. Again, I studied from
beginning my dentistry. I graduated. I was working. I was assistant, and until I left Poland;
and now I am here, thanks God. And I am very happy I am in the United States. I went here
to Tufts University. I graduated, and I am a dentist. Thanks God.

Q: We have I think two seconds. Take out the picture that you did in hiding. Just hold it up.

Q: Ok, you drew that in hiding?

A: When I was hiding, I was drawing. This was the old man who passed away after war, a
few years after war. This is a woman and mother of two children. This is her son. And
this is my brother's fiancée, and this time. No, excuse me. This is the wife of my friend,
who -- she was survived, my wife, she saved her life and her husband. He passed away
in, in Jerusalem, I think so. Israel. He was a dentist. Then, here we have what? That is my
brother’s wife. This was his fiancé. And this is a father, he’s a dentist still in Poland. He
