JOSEF
September 22, 1989

Q: Would you tell me your first name, please?

A: My name is Josef.

Q: Where and where were you born?

A: I was born in Vienna in 1915 -- June 25th, 1915. And after a few years, when I was a little
boy, my parents moved back to Poland and -- before World War I. This was Galicia. And I
was living in the town of Przemysl, and I went back with my parents and I living in
Przemysl. This was my town.

Q: Ok, tell me about your parents. What did your father do?

A: My father, he had a small grocery store, like small cafeteria, and he worked with my mother
in the store. And --

Q: Did you have brothers and sisters?

A: Yes, I have one sister, and I have four brothers. So it -- how many? Three brothers, and I was
the fourth one -- and one sister. Together, five children. And we went to school in Przemysl,
and my sister was going to the school in Przemysl until war time. And my older brother,
after graduation from high school, he went to Italy, to Bologna. He was studying medicine
there. So we were home. And after he finished the studying, he was still working in Bologna.
He was a scientist, and a very good physician.

Q: Ok -- what, tell me -- let's bring it back to you, ok, since we want to focus on you. Tell me,
you have a family, it's -- you're growing up in the town of Przemysl. Did you go to -- what
kind of activities did you take place in? Were you in Jewish school? What kinds of --

A: No, when I was in high school -- first of all, when I was in public school, how my life start? I
went one time with my father to a dentist, and I look around and I said, "I would like to be a
dentist." So my father look at me and said, "Ok, if you will be a good pupil, student, you will
be a dentist." But this dentist, he was a good psychologist, and he said, "If you like to be a
dentist, you can come to my office to watch after school, after homework, and you are very
welcome." And I was coming to him, and when I graduated from high school, still I was
coming to him, and I was assisting him. And I learned about everything else from his work.

Then when war broke up, no, that's it, I couldn't do nothing. then after war was finished. I am