and my brothers in ghetto. We apparently didn't know about deaths, what's happened to my
brother. But my wife how she told you, she was going over there. She was in contact with us.
She help us. She was working with my mother and father in this small shop. She was like our
own sister, like a daughter. She was very attached to us. We were attached to her. But she
was Aryan.

She had no -- Catholic, so they didn't touch her. So she can go some. She was sneaking
under the fences in the ghetto, and she brought something and this and this. We have contact.
When they took my brother to Lvov, she was going to see him, because she was a girl and
she was Catholic. She could go close and see something. He can go to the fence or
something. She ask some watchman who are same day. Maybe they let her go to talk. So she
was in contact with him. One thing she make arrangement with him, but she will break. He
asked her that he wanted to run away and maybe she will hide him. So she has to bring him
some clothes, this and this; and they make arrangement where, where he has to come to see
her. And this time she came but they make special hours when she will meet him. But there
was now going the military trains, and all kinds of civil trains were stopped. First, military.
So it was a couple of hours, maybe two or three hours late she came, because the trains was -
- she couldn't come. In meantime, he -- according to, to his agreement with her -- he left the,
the camp, and he saw a woman who was similar to my wife. He came to her. And then she
was not this right person. So when he was turning back, he want to go back, some
watchman, they find him. They saw him. Now they took him back to, to camp. And when
my wife came to see him, they told her it's too late. They hanged him. So she came very
depressed.

Q: Let's make something very clear. Slow down a minute, please. Relax. We have plenty of
time. You are about 18? How old are you?

A: 24 at this time.

Q: 24 at this point, all right. Your wife was 16, 17?

A: She was 17, yes.

Q: All right. We need to make clear that she was obviously not yet your wife.

A: No.

Q: And that there was indeed -- because she was Catholic, you would have tended not to think
in those directions.