A: No. She was only very, very attached to us. She was like a relative. We, we love her very
much, and she love us very much.

Q: Let's talk now -- I want to talk about you. I don't want her story, or her side of it. I want your
side of it, all right? Your brother has been has been taken, has been killed.

A: Yes.

Q: What did you do? Where were you at this point in time?

A: In ghetto, in Przemysl. And we got the message. We didn't tell the parents what was
happened. To them, they didn't know about it. And we work. And then -- and this was July --
in August 1942. They make another ghetto -- smaller -- another Aktion. They took our
parents, and they took away. And I remember when they was concentration them in the place
I was staying, and I was crying. And there was staying a young soldier. He asked me, "Why
are you crying?" I said, "They are my parents!" He said, "You will never see them." I said,
"They supposed to take them to, to a job to work." "They will murder," he said. "You will
never see him -- them." If you want, you can bring them little tea or something to drink. But
go fast." And I was running back to home, and I prepare something for them, and I came. It
was too late. I saw them already pushing to the cattle wagon, with sticks. They was pushing.
And my father, he turns -- like my mother was turned down; and he looked and he saw me,
and he said like this [gesturing father waving goodbye to Josef]. And this was the last thing
what I saw. Then -- and there was in the meantime other Aktion. And we still working hard.
And, and November 18, 1942, there was the Aktion.

Right before the people, they was finding out that they were an Aktion. So they make under
the kitchen an apartment. There was like an entrance to cellar, and we make like a bunker.
Was hiding entrance, and we make like a bunker. And we were sitting there. There was
almost thirty people there, and we are sitting. And we went on November 17th at night there
hiding. On November 18th, in the morning, start to be the Aktion. We heard noises,
shooting, screaming. And barking dogs and everything. And we heard what's going on.
Then, almost at the end, was almost probably before seven o'clock, after six, before seven
o'clock in the evening, there was dark because the weather was snow, cold. And somebody
pushed the window, and they said it was covered with sack -- with straw. We didn't know
about that. Because was called a sound from the people who were Ordnungs," the people
who was helping the, the, the SS men. He pushed with a stick the, the, the sack with straw,
and was a little light. Because we were sitting in dark, but still came a little light inside. He
said, "If somebody's hiding there" -- he said this automatically -- "has to get out, because we
will throw grenades insi-- inside." So there was a woman near the window sitting. She
pushed her daughter, and said, "Go. Save your life." She pushed her through the window.