commit suicide. Another second -- like instant -- I said, "Put me back! Put me back!" They,
they pull me back, and I said, "I will go with my legs forward." And they pushed me with
my legs, and I was hanging on the left hand. I was holding the window outside. I was
hanging, and the train was in good speed. When the train was taking a curve, I jumped
forward and I was sliding. And suddenly I felt severe pain in my chest, and I was
unconscious maybe a few minutes. I don't know how long. Then when I came to my normal
condition, I saw in my breast there was a hole like a fist. And this hurt my chest, because I
stopped on a small post with wires. There were some wires. And I came out, and the train
was far away, and I was running up the train. The train -- there was snow, and I was looking
where would I find my brother. No, but I find two other boys who jumped. One has broken
here bone, clavicula (ph) bone, broken. One was moving.

Another, his face scratched, but nothing special. So I helped. I took the, the belt. I put like
here [showing that he tied the arm to the man's side], to, to keep the hands not moving. And
I said, "We have to run away." So we are going under the hill just like small way. There was
snow. And we were going to the place that was called Lipowice. Was after Przemysl maybe
seven kilometers, maybe more. And I went there, and I told them, "I have here a man." And
normal, in wintertime of skiing, and I was coming to him to buy tea or coffee or some
cookies. And I said, "I will go to him. Maybe he will give us shelter for one night. But then
he will think in the morning what he have to do." And I went to him, and I knocked on the
window. He opened, and I told him who I am. He was a nice man. He was scared, very,
because he knows what happens. "Nobody has seen you?" I said, "No, no." And he gives us
the shelter. We were sitting on the bench all night. And he give some to drink, you know,
coffee or anything. People drink only water, because we have very high temperature, very.
Then in the morning we said goodbye. And we said to each other, "Everybody's going in
different way. They will not catch us together. Only separate way." As a matter of fact, after
war I met them. They survive. So I went to my friend, who was working in hospital. And I
went to him. I was holding my loaf, bread loaf, under my arm, and I was looking like a
working man who's going to work. And when I came to him, he was scared. I told him
what's happened, and he said, "Ok, I will try to do the best for you." And he was keeping me
in a small cottage, which was his mother's cottage, but she was not in this time at home. So
he said, "Stay here." He locked me inside. And I was there all day, and I didn't know what to
do. And I was..."Maybe I can trust him, maybe no. Maybe he can go to Gestapo or
something, and this will be the end." But on the evening, he came. Was about eight o'clock.
He said, "Joe, I am sorry. I was going around. I cannot find place for you. I cannot keep you,
because my wife she is scared. We cannot risk our lives. So what you want to do? Tell me. I
will bring you in any place." He worked in hospital, and he had those carriage with two
horses. Always he could travel, because he can ride this. So there was -- on the other side of
the Przemysl there was a bridge. So to go to the town where I was living before, we have to
cross the bridge. But on the bridge, there was always watchmen, German.