They were watching who was crossing; they were looking inside you're not smuggling
something. So he said, "I will risk my life and your life. But you have to lie down under my
feet. I will cover you with a blanket. I will keep my feet on your face. And I have the pass, so
I will try to go. But don't move. We will see. Maybe we'll be lucky." And really, we went
there. They stopped him. But they know him, and he's showed them the pass. They was
looking inside, but they didn't look too much. He was holding the feet on my back. And we
passed. So they came downtown, close to my street that I was living. He said, "Joe, good
luck. That's it. And do what you want." I said thank you, and he left. So I didn't know where
to go. I went back to the place where we were living before. And I went to cellar. There was
not basement, only cellar -- open cellars. And I was sitting there, and, and I saw this is not
realistic because the people who maybe who lives there know who was living there, they can
come back to cellar. They will see me. There was open space. And there's -- in fact there
were rats and mice and dirt. So I said, "Maybe Stefania, maybe she will let me stay for one
night." And I went upstairs, and I was knocking at her door. And she -- first she asked me, I
told her quietly, "It's me." And she opened the door, and she saw me. Now, I was really in
very bad condition. And she was very mercy to me with her really soft heart. She was most
caring. She helped me to wash and this -- and she gave me her bed to sleep. And her sister,
she was wondering what's going on. Because she saw me first, little sister. And she
explained her how this, anyway. And the morning, she put me under the bed; and on the
front of me, she put a sack with potatoes. She had a sack of potatoes there. So I was behind
the sack of the potatoes, and she covered me blanket. She said, "Don't make noise, because
the people are coming -- friends and this -- and they cannot see you." So this was for a few
days. Then she went to my brother. He worked in, in a farm which was under supervision of
military, belonged to the military, and they -- all brothers was going through the military.

So my brother was working there with his fiancee. And when was the Aktion in the ghetto,
they hold the people there because they know they will go back to ghetto, and they will take
them. The, the -- no, the SS will take them. But they wanted to save them, because they
needed them for work. So they told them stay this night and one day more here. They were
sleeping there. So my wife, she came. She told him what's happened, and she told him that I
survive. I came, and I'm at her home. He was very happy. And he was crying, also, because
we lost the rest of the family. And then his wife, and they was taking them back to ghetto
under guard -- I don't know how -- she run away. And she came to us to home...to...to my
wife's, where I was hiding temporary. No, she said, no, she will not go to ghetto. She doesn't
like to go. I didn't like to either go to ghetto, but my brother, he went back to ghetto with the
group. And then he came there. He start to contact with us. And then he told us in the ghetto
now is quiet, temporarily is quiet. "Nothing there, nothing. No Aktion. So you maybe you'll
come back." After a few days, we went back to ghetto.

Q: What was the ghetto like at that time?