A: This was no -- there were a few streets they surrounded with fences. And there was watch,
like police. Police watch-- watching men, Polish, and there was German. Was the stationary
because when it was Aktion, it came special group--SS or special military group who was
taking the Aktion then or doing this. But when this other, they left to the domestic people to
take care about the ghetto. That the people cannot get out, that cannot go in. But my wife's
little sister. She was going, playing and she was the messenger. She was bringing some
message. We wanted something. We asked her. She would prepare in, in the evening.
Always I was under the fence sneaking through the town and I was coming and I took her to
pick up something. No. In the meantime, my brother, he got typhus and his friend got typhus.

That was terrible thing, but we need something to -- there was no medicine. Nothing but
something to, to keep them strong, to fight the temperature. So my wife, she prepared a sugar
or milk or some cheese, butter -- something. And I smuggled this back to ghetto. Some drugs
like painkiller drugs, you know, against high fever. This was, she could get without a, a
prescription. So, like aspirin, you know -- such things like that. So kids, they survive, thanks
God. But one time -- I have to tell this story. I was going from ghetto, and, and my watch
was 8:30. But the, the curfew was until 9:00. After 9:00, they can catch anybody on the, on
the street. They can kill without asking if you have no permission to go on the pavement.
And I had always dressed similar to the dress like the young Hitlerjugend,deg they were wear.
Those high shoes, short tight black pants, and nice coat and a nice hat with a, with a -- with
the, with a -- like a, no, like a shaving thing, you know? Like a feather, yes. And I was going
always dressed in this. But this time I had an attache case, because I was going to my way to
pick up some food and my watch.

And I changed my dress from my old dress to this dress. I forget to put this -- I'll show you
this false document. And I'm going... There was a bridge from the ghetto, which was going
to the town, but the, the bridge was going from street to the factory which there was fixing
broken cars, trains and everything. So -- but on the side was entrance to ghetto, but this was
blocked by barbed wires. And was like a road that you cannot go to ghetto. But always I was
going through the holes, and I was going to the bridge down to the town. And when I was
going downstairs to the town already, suddenly a flashlight went to my face. "Oh," I said.
"That's it!" And in German language, somebody said, "Hande hoch!"" I put my "Hande
hoch," and the attache case fell down. So he came close. And I said, "No, this is German
police. That's it! They will finish me." But I said why. And then came this Polish policeman.
He was speaking German. He asked me, "Who are you? Where are you going?" I said, "No,
I will not tell him that I am come from ghetto." I said, "I am going from the factory. I worked
for my father." I said, "Dinner -- lunch. And I -- dinner -- and I am going back from factory