0
home." "Give me your documents." And I am looking in pocket, and I don't have my -- they
called the ID card was Kennkarte" in German, ID card. I was looking. I said, "I am sorry. I
don't have in this dress. But if you like to come with me to the factory, there everybody
knows me and, and they will tell you who Iam." And I told, "I will go with you back." Then
we will be close to the entrance to the block, entrance to the ghetto. I will give him a blow,
and I will jump to ghetto. But he was smart. He said, "No, no. No way! No way!" I said,
"Why?" He said, "Maybe you are a spy." I said, "What kind of spy? You are a Polish man,
and I am a Polish man. And I am a spy for whom? I am spying for Germany?" He was
working for Germany. "I'm not spying for Germany." He said, "Don't touch me." He start to
swear to me: "You such -- out. And you, we're going to Gestapo."

And I know if he will go with me, and this is -- he said, "You know, it is 9:30." And I show
him my watch, was 8:30. He said, "Throw your watch under the running train. This is 9:30."
My watch was not working. And I was late. After curfew, curfew. So he said, "We are going
to Gestapo." And like this, and I know if he will go on the street at night with this -- with me,
the German, you know, police, they are going also patrols. And they will see him holding.
They will take me from him, and they will kill me on the spot. So I, I know the psychology
of the Polish people. I start to talk him: "Hey, you are a tall guy and I am a little short man.
And you are holding me under gun. What you think, that I will kill you or I will run away?
You're supposed to be ashamed! You're a coward." Like this. And he said to me, "You don't
--" I said, "You're a coward." So he put his gun here, the rifle. He walked with me like this,
and we start to talk Polish. I talk to him Polish. So, really, there was going a German patrol,
but they look on us and they didn't touch. Because he was a policeman, and I was talking to
him Polish. He was talking to me Polish. They didn't understand what we were talking about.
So they thought maybe I'm also a, a secret police. So I am going with him.

So one thing passed away behind me, and then we are going, there was a street up. And I see
from far away, like maybe two hundred yards, a small light. And there stand a watchman as
the Gestapo watchman. That's the Gestapo office. I said, "This is the end!" And I talked to
him. No, no, no. He is taking me there. I said, "Listen, if I am a partisan, you know, they are
watching you. Your whole family will be killed, and you will be killed. They will put in fire
your house. You will not survive." I said, "I don't care. They will kill me, but you will -- " He
said, "I don't care. Now this is wartime, and this is my duty." And sudden, I don't know,
came to my mind something. And I hit him with my right hand. He was taller than me. I hit
him once right, and then upper cut his left. He fell down like a piece of wood. I felt I have
such power because this was death -- life or death. And I was so angry. I was said to him,
"You dirty pig! You will get what you deserve! I could kill you right now," I said, "but I will
not do this. I will not make my hands dirty." And I turn around and I was going on the hill