1
the street down. I was not running. And then, in the last minute, I start to run away. And I
came to my wife at night. I was out after 10:00, and she was, "What's happen?" And I told
her the story. And I was all night staying there. And next morning, I told her, "Go look on
the street. Watch what's happen." She went. She came, said, "Nothing. No nothing, and
nobody." I don't know. You know, quiet. And in the evening, I was going back to ghetto.
And when I was jumping through the bridge, I heard shooting -- [Imitating shooting sound].
And I went myself, and then I saw, look what's happen. There are another like SS man or
maybe not SS man, but he was a secret police. There was lying a woman he took from the
train. A woman, he was taking off her shoes. She was still alive, and he was taking off her
shoes. He killed her because he felt she was a Jewish person. They found her. Anyway, I
went to ghetto. And I came to there, and I was there for a while.

Then her sister always was with her and counting, and I came back. I talked to my wife was
yet to find a place to hide, because in this place we cannot stay. I said, "I have to come with
my brother, with his fiancee, and my friend and his daughter. Would be about five to seven
people." And so we organized. She's under -- "The beginning," she said, "it will be very
hard." So I said, "Listen. We have to do this." So she was looking, and she find on the hill is
like a side street on the border of the town. The name of Tatarska (ph) Street. And this was
like a nice small cottage. And I came with her once there before she made the arrangement.
And I said, "This is perfect for this purpose." So she make the whole thing legal. She says
she make -- she get the papers. And when she moved there, I came there with my friend.
And first we were looking around; and I think, "We have to make a bunker." So under her
bed, I cut a piece of floor. We start to digging hole. We were digging, and she was taking in
the evening in a sack this ground. And there was some trees, and between them she was
putting the, the, you know, the soil, so nobody would see the soil. And we make such in that
two could stay there. The attic was too open. And there was like a ladder from the hole.
There was a hole between attic. So I was thinking, "Later." But for first thing, I said, "Instead
of sit in the open attic, maybe we will be there." But then came the father of, the father of the
girl, and, and came another, my friend. So was a little more people. And I...I don't know
what to do. I said, "Now we have to go upstairs because we cannot be in the hole." So we
are, we are sitting in the open attic. And then I told to my wife, "Look, maybe we will find
an old wood, something that we can call and make a first row similar to this round wood."

This would be nothing new. And I said, "We will make a false wall, do something." Was
very difficult. She was running around many places, and then she find somebody. And they
brought her this, and she said she like to have this for wintertime for, for fire. So they left
this. And she brought this little by little inside. The neighbors was asking, "What?" She said,
"No, for I like to cut this and cut for wintertime." So was not for -- not I wanted. Then when
she brought the -- we measured everything. We cut it by little and we make numbers that
everything will fit. Then we have to nail this. There will be noise. So I advised my wife