2
make washing, laundry -- everything. And ask them if they have ropes and nails, that you
will put them in attic, you will hang them and they will dry. The, the, you know, the washed
laundry. So that. So they did, and this time, instead of putting nails and put, you know, the
ropes, we know they, they were fast. Then we put a little also outside, and if you put
everything there, there will be not now, they will be exact like is dirt and, and from the
spiders. The -- took from our place they put another place. Was look exactly like old thing.
And this the, the attic was shut in maybe like two yards. I make sure of it. And I make, make
the roof was going on an angle, so I make a small door, so that I can every time open, watch
and close right away if somebody will come. And I was this what I have my curved spine.
And that's because almost two weeks I was laying like this, because I was watching always if
somebody not come. And it's hard to know. We were there. It was very fine. And then the
people that come, little by little, from ghetto-- then my brother and his wife, they came, the
last ones. But so other people, they came little by little. There was story how they were
coming. But my wife, I think she thought about it. So anyway, we were all 13 there..

Now we have to organize food and organize the regime control that we do not do something
which can be dangerous to our life. So I make like the [indecipherable]. Every two hours
somebody sitting watching. They will be not snoring at night. So we have a stick with a
rabbit, this was from a rabbit like with the tail. And I told them if somebody was snoring,
you go to your nose to wake up. But don't make noise. Because you have to be, perhaps
somebody will wake you up and try to sleep on the stomach. Everybody on the stomach, not
on the back because you will snore. That was dangerous, number one. Number two, no
smoking. The people, they want to smoke. They were smoking anything. I said, "No
smoking, because the, the smoke will go to the place within the, the wall, or they can see at
night light through, or can be a fire. We don't need this." So there was really a fight to
convince the people that this is tragedy. This is not for us. Then one, the woman who came
with her two children, she got typhus there. And she, she was infected in ghetto, but after a
few days, after a week, the typhus develop. And she had high fever, temperature. She was
talking. So I was the one who was taking care of her. I said nobody could come close to her.
So it was really tough, because there was not too much space, but she was -- I was watching
her. I shave her hair, and I said to my wife, "Do anything what you wanted to get
something." Because after experience with my brother in ghetto, to keep her going. And she
was trying to buy for her sugar and something, and aspirin and this and this. And anyway, I,
I make also a prescription for heart, you know, some medicine to keep, make the heart going.
And she went to pharmacy. And I said, "Maybe, we ok. Maybe, no." And she made it.

.

I don't know how. She got started. It was another story, but a lot -- she made it, she got it, she
came. Anyway, the children were prepared if she, God forbidding, passed away, that we in
the hole will make a, we will make a hole, a grave. We will put her temporary there. Because