3
we had to be prepared for everything, I told them. But anyway, she survived, was Ok. Then I
convinced the people stop smoking, and about snoring. Then was problem with, with food,
because this woman she wanted special, special food all the time. But something was very
difficult to get. This was not so easy. Was tough time. But we were sitting. Was many, many
stories, like my wife told you. They came, they gave her two hours to move out. We asked
her to run away, to save her life and her sister. "No," she said no. And she was staying, and
she survived. Then came the German. They came, they have two nurses -- there were two
nurse and their two boyfriends. And they was almost everyday sleeping there. So we were
above them. And sometimes there was little noise, because they can hear. And I was feeling
that this is very dangerous. They are there. And one time, like my wife told, they came. They
was holding my wife, and one nurse also was with them and one was running. There was
like not stairs, only there was like no...

Q: Ladder.

A: Ladder. And...and no -- you can hear the noise if somebody stepping on the -- so I was
hearing something. And I closed the door. And suddenly came one of the nurse. She was
looking around, going around looking, not quiet. Was the last moment. And she went down,
and she told them no. So my wife, she saw what's going on. Then she bought chicken, and
she was holding the chicken in, in the hole, and the chicken was making noise. Something to,
you know, to mask the noise. And this was what we're doing to, to try to, you know, to
camouflage everything. Then about food. Her little sister, she was coming bringing
something bread. I have always there a few loaves of bread, which changing I make some
mess, like a nest; and there was exchanging every time fresh and they all using what we were
eating. And to not make suspicious the, the neighbor, so she says, "She is bringing bread and
she is selling bread." And always was going in this way, that they couldn't count how it is.
What was hiding. And she never was talking to people. She could play with little children,
and never -- she never said a word about us. And one time, they came. My wife, she didn't
come to work. And there was another, she has to work. So she was -- a few days she didn't
come because she was feeling sick. She didn't feel good. And I see through the window --
because always we were watching to see if someone could see a policeman is coming -- a
Polish policeman and a German policeman is coming. So I told her, "Go with us to the, to
the" I said, "to the bunker. Hide. And they will only your little sister.

.

She will tell them that you went to buy some food, you know, in the village, something."
And they knocked on the door, and she opened. They came. "Where's your sister? Who are
you, your sister? Where's your sister?" Said, "She went to the village to...to buy some food."
The policeman, he turned and slapped her in the face. She fell down. And he said, "Why are
you lying? Your neighbor, they told us that she was just now out here in the yard." And she
start stutter "Why I, I have to lie? She went -- she has to go through the yard. So she was in