4
the yard, and she went to, to the village. How she can go to, to the village. She has to go
through the yard, so maybe they saw her." She talk to them. I, I don't know. She told she told
them that she's going to, to buy food, and they look and they start to look around. She didn't
have nothing there. A piece of bread and a little soup. Nothing. He said, "That's all you
have?" "Yes." "You're alone at home?" She said, "Yes." "You sleep alone?" "Yes." "You're
not afraid?" She said, "Why I have to be afraid?" "That's what you are eating?" And she said,
"Yes." They left her, and she didn't say nothing. And they left her, and, and my wife was
hiding, and she came out. That was one episode. There was many, many episodes during the
time. There was almost two years. Every day, each hour was something that our life was
threatened with gun. At the end, when our -- one thing was good. They have a radio, the
German. And they was listening to the news, and I was listening to the news. And we can,
they are listening to us we can thinking how they are going back. They're running away. And
I said to my wife, "Soon or later, very soon, you will have your Russian. Because they give
them hell, and they ran." And all my -- almost I find the day when they will come. And I
remember the last day when we heard there was fighting. And we can hear the noise of the
different noise of different bullet, different rifles.

The Russians have different rifles, and the German have different rifles. We heard the
difference in the noise. So I said to my wife, "Probably they will come, but they are
fighting." We cannot go down, and we have to stay in the attic. But the bullets and ding,
ding, ding, you know, was hitting. I said to my all people there, "Listen, we have to lie down.
Keep something between your teeth. If somebody -- they will hit somebody, you cannot
scream. If somebody will be dead, he will be dead. This is our last chance. But if they find
us, if somebody will scream, she will be killed and her sister will be killed. And we will be
killed. Because everybody now look for each other. So you have to be prepared that
something will happen no worse, nothing." And we are lying down and listening, and she
went down with her sister. She went down, and with the neighbors was waiting. And
anyway, we under-- we can hear the bullet. Some start to be more close, and some start to go
away. And I said, "I think probably the Russian are coming. Because listen to the Russian
sound of the bullets, the noise. But we will see." Then early in the morning, by six or seven
o'clock in the morning, I look through the small thing. They are going about six German
soldiers with rifles, the helmets. All came back going on the street up. I said, "My God, still,
still there are Germans here." And suddenly it came out a few boys with the armbands and a
few soldiers, Russian soldiers and to them, "Hands up!" And they fell down, and they were
begging. I said, "Thanks God, we are free!" And that's it. Next day, this what happened -- or
the same day. I don't remember. Came two Russian, White Russian. One was the lieutenant
and one was a sergeant. And they came. She was in the window singing, and this happened.

And they came, and first they asked, "Is Germans here?" She said, "No, there are no
Germans here." "Can we come?" And said, "Ok." They came inside. And my wife, she